An IF statement is a compound control statement. It contains more then one
execution path (counting implicit empty path for an IF statement without ELSE
and ELSIF paths), and an execution of an IF statement executes exactly one
path.

A IF statement path contains other statements as its components. There are
three kinds of IF statement paths - IF path, ELSIF path and ELSE path. IF and
ELSIF paths contain conditional boolean expression that defines if the path
shall be chosen for execution. The conditional expression may be evaluated
even if the path is not executed. Below the statement "a path is (not)
executed/reported as (un)covered" means that the code of the path that
contains conditional expression is (not) executed/reported as (un)covered.
ELSE path does not contain a conditional expression, so it cannot be executed
and reported as covered or uncovered.

If an IF statement is not executed, the all its paths and all their component
statements shall be reported as uncovered (Test case No_Execution).

If an IF statement is executed, and its IF path is chosen, then the IF path
and all its components shall be reported as covered, and all the other paths
and components thereof shall be reported as uncovered (Test case IF_Path).

If an IF statement is executed, and its ElSIF path is chosen, then this ELSIF
path and all its components shall be reported as covered. All the path and
components thereof that follow this ELSIF path (if any) shall be reported as
uncovered. The IF path and ELSIF paths (if any) that precede the ELSIF path
being executed shall be reported as covered, but all the components thereof
shall be reported as uncovered (Test case ELSIF_Path).

If an IF statement is executed, and its ElSE path is chosen, then the
components of this ELSE path shall be reported as covered. The IF path and
ELSIF paths (if any) that precede the ELSE path shall be reported as covered,
but all the components thereof shall be reported as uncovered (Test case
ELSE_Path).

if an IF statement is executed several times, and different paths of this
statement are chosen by different executions, so all the executed paths and
components thereof shall be reported as covered (Test Case Multiple_Paths)

Testing strategy:

Different syntax forms of IF statement should be checked:
   - simplest form - no ELSE path, no ELSIF path;
   - multiple ELSIF paths;
   - ELSE path with and without ELSIF path;
   - ELSIF paths with and without ELSE path;
